---
editor_options: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
---

# ![](images/Screenshot%202023-05-03%20at%206.01.42%20PM.png)

Danielle R. Freund1\*, Thomas D. Gable1, Sean M. Johnson-Bice2, Austin
T. Homkes1, Steve K. Windels,1,3 Joseph K. Bump1

1.  Department of Fisheries, Wildlife, and Conservation Biology,
    University of Minnesota, 2003 Upper\
    Buford Circle, St. Paul, MN 55801, USA

2.  Department of Biological Sciences, University of Manitoba, 50 Sifton
    Road, Winnipeg, Manitoba R3T 2N2, Canada

3.  Voyageurs National Park, National Park Service, 360 Highway 11 E,
    International Falls, 56649 MN, USA

    \*Corresponding author. Email:
    [Danirfreund\@gmail.com](mailto:Danirfreund@gmail.com){.email},
    Address: 135 B Skok Hall, 2003 Upper Buford Circle, Saint Paul, MN
    55108

**Abstract**

Through GPS-collar locations, remote cameras, field observations, and
the first wild wolf to be GPS-collared with a camera-collar, we describe
when, where and how wolves fish in a freshwater ecosystem. From 2017 to
2021, we recorded more than ten wolves (*Canis lupus*) hunting fish
during the spring spawning season in northern Minnesota, USA. Wolves
ambushed fish in creeks at night when spawning fish were abundant,
available, and vulnerable in shallow waters. We observed wolves
specifically targeting sections of rivers below beaver (*Castor
canadensis*) dams, suggesting that beavers may indirectly facilitate
wolf fishing behaviour. Wolves also cached fish on shorelines. We
documented these findings across five different social groups at four
distinct waterways, suggesting that wolf fishing behaviour may be
widespread in similar ecosystems but has likely remained difficult to
study given its annual brevity. Spawning fish may serve as a valuable
pulsed resource for packs because the spring spawning season coincides
with low primary prey (deer *Odocoileus virginianus)* availability and
abundance, and when packs have higher energetic demands due to newly
born pups. We demonstrate the flexibility and adaptability of wolf
hunting and foraging behaviour, and provide insight into how wolves can
survive in a myriad of ecosystems.

![](images/Screenshot%202023-05-03%20at%206.00.26%20PM.png)
